Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lobs and
today I'm joined by a return guest, Doctor Kristen
Goi. She is professor and chair of Russian and
East European Studies at the University of Pennsylvania. In
our previous interview, we talked about her. Why Women
have better Sex and Socialism and today we're talking
about her other book, Everyday Utopia, What 2 1000
Years of Wild Experiments Can Teach Us about the
good life. So, Dr. Goi, welcome back to the
show. It's always a pleasure to talk with you.
Yeah, no, it's really fun to be back. Thanks
so much for the invitation.
OK, so everyday utopia, uh, what is the premise
of the book?
Yeah, so it's a very simple premise, uh, but
it has a lot of implications because basically what
I'm arguing in the book in sort of very
concrete steps, is that the way that we in,
let's say the industrialized north today organize our domestic
lives is actually an aberration. It's not natural. The
idea of exclusive bi parental care for your own
biological children in a usually heterosexual relationship, in a
single family home surrounded by all of your own
privately owned stuff. IS actually a big part of
the problem of why people are very unhappy and
dissatisfied with advanced industrialized economies today, and it also
plays into the falling birth rate, which is uh
another part of the argument that I'm developing outside
of the book. But I think that it's very
important to understand that our domestic lives are very
unnatural, and so I try. To take each piece
of this and to say how it was different
and how it could be different in the future.
I mean, uh, our modern life ways in contemporary
industrialized and post-industrial societies are very unnatural, as you
said, but they are also uncommon, right? Because even
among um contemporary societies, I mean, in traditional societies
like hunter-gatherers, horticulturists, we don't see anything like that
or it is not really common. And even, I
mean, in many societies. Across the globe, there are
uh social arrangements that have very little to do
with it.
Exactly. And that's one of the things that I
do. I, I sort of take a longer, uh,
evolutionary anthropology, uh, perspective, and I, and I try
to understand like how did we get here? How
did we get to this sort of idea of
monogamous by parental care in a nuclear family, in
a single family home with a bunch of privately
owned stuff like that is part of a process
of You know, really the last couple of centuries
and industrial industrial development and a certain way that
capitalism wants us to organize our private lives in
order to benefit a particular kind of economic system
and especially to uphold a certain level of inequality
in society, that is really truly unnatural. And so,
you know, the book is very much uh a
an attempt to examine. How our lives could be
differently, not just in the public sphere, because that's
really what I dealt with and why women have
better sex under socialism. Where I talked about the
private sphere, but I was very much interested in
sort of state-driven solutions. This is a book that's
really about organic solutions, sort of society driven solutions,
private solutions, things that we can do in our
everyday lives when we don't feel like the government
is really responding to us and our demands in
quite the way we want it to.
OK, but I also want to ask you about
something that you, of course, also explored in your
book that has to do with sort of the
history of utopia. But what is a utopia? What
does the word mean?
Yeah, so this word is, um, is coined by
Sir Thomas Moore, uh, Saint Thomas Moore these days.
Uh, HE wrote a book in 1516 called Utopia,
and this book was written in the aftermath of
Amerigo Vespucci and Columbus's, you know, quote unquote discovery
of America, the those original sort of explorers who
went and found this completely different place, and And
that sort of got a lot of people thinking,
especially in in in Europe at this time, about
how life could be differently than it is. And
so, so Thomas Moore wrote this book about an
island that he had apparently visited and uh you
know, it's sort of a a traveler's tale of
how the people of utopia live. And the word
itself comes from the ancient Greek, and it's fascinating
because the way that it's written utopia literally means
no place. But if you were to change the
prefix to EU, it would mean a good place.
And so it has this wonderful ambiguity in the
ancient Greek and Thomas Moore was clearly aware of
that ambiguity when he used this word to name
this sort of fantastical island. It is a no
place, but it is also a good place. And
the reason he coined this word, and the reason
that he told this tale was really as a
way of kind of critiquing contemporary life in England
at the time. He was the Lord Chancellor to
Henry the 8th, and there was a lot of
upheaval happening in society in England, and so he
wanted to imagine what the world would look like
if things were different. And for more, that meant
not only politically different in the public realm, but
also it meant privately different in our domestic lives.
Mhm. Yeah, I mean, I read Thomas Moore's book
Utopia when I was like 2014 years ago or
so, and it's a really fascinating read. So, uh,
but tell us also about utopias in the late
18th and early 19th century because there were some
experiments, I guess back then that people tried. So
tell us a little bit about that.
Yeah, so I think, you know, one of the
ways that we get the word utopia in a
kind of political discourse today is because of Marx
and Engels who were talking about scientific socialism versus
what they called utopian socialism. And of course they
didn't like utopian socialism, so they were criticizing it.
They were actually trying to develop their own body
of ideology and theories in opposition to the utopians.
But the utopians are very, very important to them
because many of the ideas that have Come down
to us in sort of socialist or social democratic
or even communist anarchist politics come from Marx and
Engels engaging with the utopians. And so, very specifically,
there are kind of two strands of utopianism that
appear in the 18th and 19th centuries. The utopian
socialists were people like Charles Fourier, Robert Owen in
Scotland, the Saint Simonians that Emerged in Switzerland and
then kind of moved into France. These are all
people kind of have um creating social utopias in
the aftermath of the French Revolution. And then you
also have a lot of religious utopias and the
Saint Simonians sort of start out as a social
movement and end up as a religion. But these
are really fascinating groups, um, who thought that you
could reorganize society in little clusters, like you could
withdraw from the world and create these little utopian
societies, the societies outside of the mainstream, and that
they would be so attractive that people outside of
the societies would want to join them. So they
weren't calling for any kind of revolutionary change. They
were calling for what we might think of as
prefigurative politics, with the anarchists often called prefigurative politics.
The idea of building the world that you want
to live in right here and right now, and
living as if that world already existed. And then
hopefully by example, you would um you would appeal
to others. And so particularly people like Fourier. There,
there was a plan, like a very specific plan
about building these philansteries and certain kinds of people
would live in them, and there were uh amazing
diversity of Fourierist communities, particularly in the United States.
In Canada, North America, where people really tried to
take his ideas and put them into practice. And
I think the, especially the 19th century was sort
of a heyday of utopian experiments, but these were
always very small communities. And they never really ended
up lasting very long because there were financial issues,
there were problems of organization. But really, I think
the big thing is that there was a lot
of resistance from mainstream society. People were very, very
opposed to the idea of these utopian communities where
they outlawed slavery and they treated women. As equals
and they um held property in common and raised
their children collectively. They were doing things that mainstream
sort of Christian patriarchal society just could not really
accept. And so most of those 19th century utopias,
and there were many that were they some of
them, some of them lasted a lot longer than
others, some in France. Lasted for 109 years, but
um, but in the end they all kind of
fell away because they didn't have a real revolutionary
program for the transformation of the entire society. They
were just trying to build little communities, little pocket
utopias within a more hostile larger society that they
that they didn't really try to change.
In the book, you also talk about how utopian
visions of how to build a different future often
follow moments of great social upheaval. Uh, EXPLAIN that
and why is that the case?
Yeah, I, I think that, you know, this is
an interesting pattern, um, that I noticed like, so
Utopia, the original Thomas Moore book is really written
after 1492, the discoveries of 1492, which sort of
shake the old European uh powers and ways of
thinking. If you think of Tomaso Campanella in Italy.
Um, AND, uh, his utopian vision of the city
of the sun, it happens after the discoveries of
Copernicus, right, and heliocentrism. So there, and, and, and
many of the utopian socialists that I just talked
about in the 18th century were and early 19th
century were in the aftermath of the French Revolution.
And so I think what happens is that sometimes,
and it could be because of a war, a
revolution, it could be a pandemic. Something happens that
sort of shakes people out of the status quo.
They're they're they're confused. They feel uncomfortable, like climate
change is, is another, I think, possible avenue for
this, that suddenly we realized that the way that
we're living right now is not sustainable or that
it it contains within it some seeds of destruction
or instability that we want to change. And so,
while things are going well, we tend to have
this status quo bias. We tend to like the
way things are. But when things are suddenly different
or things are suddenly feeling insecure, we allow our
imaginations to run a little bit wilder and we
start to think more productively about how the future
might be different than the past. And so, I
do think that society sometimes Experiences these endogenous shocks,
and that those endogenous shocks are actually in some
ways good for the development of human progress. Like
we, we actually have these as as as be
as humans, these incredible flexible, creative and adaptive brains.
It's one of the reasons why our species has
survived for so long in so many different environmental,
geographic, climactic, um. You know, uh, circumstances, it's because
we're really, really good at adapting, because we have
this incredible prefrontal cortex that allows us to reason
and rationalize and adapt to the world around us
as it changes. And so, but we get lazy.
And because when things are just sort of like
going along, we just sort of think, OK, well,
it's not perfect. I'm not really happy with the
way the world is, but it's the way the
world is, and I'm just gonna accommodate myself to
it. But when something happens like the pandemic and
shuts everything down and suddenly we're all forced to
go like, wow, I live in an apartment all
by myself and I'm really lonely. Why am I
living like this? Um, WHY don't I have a
community of other people around me? Then we start
to, we start to reflect on why we live
the way we do and how the way we
live could be different.
So, you told us about Thomas Moore and I
also asked you about uh sort of utopian kinds
of arrangements of society in the late 18th and
early 19th centuries. But uh in the book, you
also go further back into ancient Greece and talk
about Pythagoras and this colony in Calabria, Italy. Tell
us about that.
Yeah, so this is one of those wonderful things
that people don't know. Everybody knows the Pythagorean theorem
about the triangles, but what very few people understand
is that in Pythagoras' own time, he was much
better remembered as like the founder of the Pythagorean
way of life. He, he, um, so we're talking
here, uh, Pythagoras is like 570 to 495 BC.
And we know from Iambilis, who was a sort
of a 3rd century AD philosopher, that Pythagoras left
Samos in about 5:30. Um, I think that's right,
5:30 BC, and he founded a a community, a
colony, I mean, what we might today call a
commune in Croton. Um, AND this was a really
fascinating, I mean, there's a lot of information about
this, and the reason it's so important is because
Iambilis basically says that Plato's Republic was very much
based on the way the Pythagoreans. Organized their colony
in Croton. And so they had a couple of
really interesting things that I talk about in the
book. I think the first thing is very clearly
that they held all their property in common. They
said among friends, all things are in common. They
ate their meals together collectively, sort of uh in
the same way that the Spartans did. But they
also treated women as equals, and that's really fascinating
for that particular moment of time in ancient Greece,
to have women be the equals of men. In
fact, the first named mathematician that we know of,
Teano, was a Pythagorean. And so they had uh
uh uh essentially what we think of as an
extended family of people who lived together and organized
their lives such that they could spend all of
their time sort of contemplating the mysteries of the
universe and mathematics. And we don't learn about that.
We learn about the Pythagorean theorem, but we never
learn about the conditions, the social conditions under which
Pythagoras and his followers came up with these mathematical
inventions. And from my perspective, I think that that
Pythagorean way of life was just as important to
remember and think about as how we, you know,
figure out the triangle stuff. So I, I, I
think that um Not enough of us learn about
the Pythagoreans and their way and they're very unique
utopian experiment. In fact, I say in the book
that I actually think that Pythagoras is sort of
the great great grandfather of utopia in many, many
ways.
Yeah. Uh, SO you mentioned that they shared property
and treated women as equal, as equals, but I
guess that looking across some of the sort of
societal arrangements you've told us about, there's also a
great emphasis on reimagining the role of the family
and gender roles. Correct.
Absolutely. Yeah. I think that in every single one
of these utopian. UTOPIAN communities. What, what they're struggling
against is a sort of um way of organizing
society that is a sort of patrilineal patrilocal, um
hierarchical, very um strict, almost you would say sort
of totalitarian way of organizing both the family and
the public sphere. And so these, these are free
thinkers, right? These are people who want to get
away from the status quo. They want to do
things differently. They wanna like open their minds to
new experiences and new ways of being. And so
in order to do that. You have to sort
of reimagine what society looks like, and you can't
reimagine what society looks like without reimagining what the
family looks like. And when you reimagine what the
family looks like, you're basically reimagining your gender roles.
And so, I mean, in the book, I talk,
and I think it's really important. A lot of
people don't realize that Hobbs's Leviathan, which is a
very, very important text for the way that we
live in the world today, which is 1651. This
is the book where he makes an argument for
the, the necessity of the sovereign, right? So he
says that without the sovereign, without some authority, like
without the state basically, life is quote unquote, nasty,
brutish, and short. Like we, the state of nature.
IS a state of chaos and uh and and
and violence, and we treat each other terribly and
so without having some sort of strong state authority,
we will live like unpleasant short, unhappy lives. And
if you actually read Leviathan, if you actually spend
some time with that text, Hobbs suggests that human
beings are not born obedient. Like, we are born
free. We are born as free thinkers. And in
order to learn how to be obedient to the
sovereign, to be good subjects to the sovereign, we
have to learn that in the home from our
fathers. And he very specifically draws on this ancient
Roman concept of patria potestas, which is that the
father in the family has all of the power,
even the power of life and death over his
children. Like if a father wants to sell you
or a father wants to kill you, that's his
right. And so what Hobbs says in Leviathan is
that in order for you to have a strong
state, You have to have a strong patriarchal family.
And so, in fact, it's not surprising that if
we look at right wing authoritarian movements throughout history
or even contemporary ones, what do they want more
than anything else? They want the patriarchal nuclear family,
because in the patriarchal nuclear family, people learn obedience
that is necessary to uphold a strong father figure
in the state. And so, You know, some people
want to say that gender is not political, that
gender and sexuality are all personal, but it's absolutely
a mistake to think that because if we go
back to 1651 and we look at this key
text from Hobbs, what we know is that the
family is one of the most political institutions in
society, because it is in the family that the
entire political system gets born and promoted and perpetuated
over time. Without the patriarchal nuclear family, it's very,
very hard to justify the sovereign because people want
to be free.
So moving on into more modern contemporary sorts of
social arrangements. Tell us about the co-housing movement in
Denmark where they share household shores and deepen neighborly
bonds.
Yeah, so I think that the um, the, the
co-housing movement, which is really born in in Denmark,
um, and it really comes out of a moment
of, I think, sort of feminist and anti-capitalist activism.
Um, IT gets started by an article that was
published in a newspaper called Children Should Have 100
Parents, and the idea Is that are single, I
mean, it was a it was a very, very
clear recognition that sort of single family homes that
that are architecture that are built environment promotes the
formation of a kind of family that is actually
Responsible for our unfreedom, and responsible for the oppression
of women and the oppression of the working classes.
And so there was this radical reimagination of what
architecture could look like to create more communalistic societies.
Now, it's very important to understand that the the
co-housing movement in Denmark still had a space for
privacy. They had a space for the family. So
every family still has a sort of, you know,
kitchen and a bedrooms and their own bathrooms or
whatever, but there, but they share these communal spaces,
big dining rooms, playgrounds, gardens, and, and different co-housing
communities in different parts of Denmark. And then as
the co-housing movement has spread out all over the
world, there's sort of this this really delicate balance
between privacy and community. But what I think that
the co-housing movement gets right. Is that everybody in
the community contributes collectively to the maintenance of this
community in a way that is really uh productive
for the community, the health of the community in
the long run, but also it it it it
it prevents the isolation of children and women. It
it basically sort of breaks down, um, in its
original imagination, it sort of broke down the patriarchal
nuclear family in order to sort of spread. The
labor that women do in the home, child rearing
and housework and all the sorts of um things
that are often done in the private sphere more
collectively within society so that it would be valued
and recognized as contributions to the collective good. So
the co-housing movement. I mean, unfortunately, I think it
has become almost commercialized and it's very radical origins
have sort of been abandoned because it's very useful,
for instance, for like senior citizen communities, for communities
of pensioners who who don't want to live by
themselves, they want to live more collectively. And so
a lot of co-housing movements are now sort of
being developed without more of the sort of community
oriented aspects that that uh mark those original communities
in Denmark, but it's still a promising model. I
think it's a, it's a, it's a move towards
a more communal collective way of living and we
see. We see that model in Europe, uh, in,
in places like eco villages, right? There, there are
these small eco villages all around the continent that
are trying very hard to find that delicate balance
between community and privacy in order to promote, you
know, more sustainable living.
Yeah, it's very interesting when you, you talk about
children because particularly conservatives tend to say very frequently
that uh the nuclear family is the unit of
social organization and it's the traditional form of social
organization, but it's not at all. I mean, we
know from the anthropological literature that cooperative breathing is
actually the way we tend to do things and
people still do things in more traditional societies. Correct.
Absolutely right. And, you know, uh, I think it
was just last year, there was a book that
came out in the United States, uh, by Melissa
Kearney. She's an economist, and she called, I think
the book was called The Two Parent Privilege. And
the entire book was about how children, very specifically
looking at the United States, really thrive and, and,
and, and there's all sorts of data that shows
that children who are raised in in uh families
with two parents do much better than um in
families where there's just one parent, single parent families.
But the thing that's so and and a lot
was made about this book on the radio and
on television. Oh, you know, the nuclear family is
the best thing, but one of the things, and,
and I was interviewed about this, you know, on
Freakonomics, I don't even remember like sometime in 23.
Um, OR 24, and, but everything that she says
in the book. Basically points to, if 2 parents
are better than 1, then 3 are better than
2 and 4 are better than 3. So there's,
you know, she's not saying that more parents are
bad. She's basically saying that 2 are better than
2 parents are better than 1. Um, AND, and
my point is exactly what you just said, from
an evolutionary anthropological point of view, we are cooperative
breeders. We've always raised our children in common, and
uh in various permutations of family forms, and there
are many people around the world that still do
that today. We have this saying, it takes a
village, and we know that children thrive in. Families
that have multiple caring adults, and it, it doesn't
necessarily have to be uh uh what we call
consanguineous blood related kin, right? These could be godparents,
right? These could be neighbors, friends, we just know
that. Even um recently we have wonderful data on
this because during the pandemic, babies that were born
during the pandemic and who only saw their biological
parents or maybe like a sibling. They're cognitively delayed
compared to babies that were born pre-pandemic or post
pandemic, right? Where you have access to the faces
and interactions with many other adults in your life.
So, we're actually kind of hardwired to need many,
many more adults in our life than we get.
And, um, and I'm, you know, I don't have
a problem. With single parents, but I will tell
you that the data is probably true that two
parents are better than one. But I think we
should take that data to also suggest that maybe
3 parents are better than 2 and 4 parents
are better than 3, and, and maybe a whole
community of loving, caring adults are going to be
better for our children than the way that we're
raising our children now with this exclusive. Parental care
in single family homes. I just think it's one
of the reasons why people don't want to have
children. It's too hard to do it on the
model that we say that conservatives want to convince
us, is the ideal way to bring children into
the world in this very rigid nuclear family form.
People are looking at that and saying, you know
what? That doesn't look attractive to me at all.
So rather than Doing that, I'm just not gonna
have children. And I think that there's, you know,
there's an interesting reason there are many good reasons
why people don't want to have children, but if
you do wanna have children, just don't do it
in a nuclear family. Reimagine the family, do it
in a different way. Create a different set of
familial uh uh norms so that you can raise
your children in a, in a happy, healthy way
that doesn't require conforming to this very conservative view
of the family.
Yeah. And I mean, currently, it's increasingly hard even
for just two parents to raise kids in the
current economic conditions we live in. And, I mean,
just to refer back to our first interview, maybe
people should try socialism.
Right. I mean, absolutely. So, you know, so that's,
that was one of the reasons why I wrote
this book was When I was doing all of
my, you know, international talks and things like that
for why women had better sex and socialism, that
book, you know, had a kind of a I
never expected that that book would be read outside
of the United States. I think that's the most
important thing, like I had no idea, but there
were a lot of people who told me. What
if the government isn't listening, right? What if you
have Trump, or what if you have Orban? OR
what if you have like a a a government
that is hostile to any kind of sort of
um socialization of domestic work, right? To, to, and
so that was a really good question, and I
thought, and then I, you know, I also have
a lot of anarchist friends who are like very
suspicious of the state. They're like, you know, You
you socialists like you, you have a good idea
in theory, but, but the state is not the
way to realize it, right? You should devolve everything
to sort of more federalized local communities, and people
should collectivize on their own without the intervention of
a state. And I don't particularly think that works
very well, but that's just my opinion. But I
respect the impulse behind it. Like I understand having
spent most of my career studying 20th century state
socialism in Eastern Europe, I understand the suspicion. And
so I wanted to take that seriously, that you
could Socialize, you could support families by creating kindergartens
and giving child allowances and making it a lot
easier, you know, subsidizing rent for families, making it
a lot easier to live in our society with
children. Our societies right now in the industrialized North
are extremely hostile to families, no matter what the
damn conservatives say, they don't make it easy for
anybody to have children because the cost of living
is too damn expensive. So one solution to that
is definitely redistribution away from the billionaires into public
coffers so that we have really good wide functioning
healthy social safety nets that make it easier for
parents and families to thrive. But the other version
of that. I think is because that's not gonna
happen. At least it's not gonna happen in my
country anytime soon. And so people get frustrated and
they throw up their hands and they say, I
don't know how to live the life that I
want to live, given the political reality that I
live in under Trump right now, for instance. So
how, so should I just give up? Should I
just, you know, Give up on every political intervention
that I can make? Should I give into despair?
And my answer is no, you shouldn't give in
to despair because there are still things that you
can do on a private level. I think we
need to do both. We need to be activists
politically. We have to put pressure on our governments.
We have to put pressure on the state, but,
but sometimes our political systems are going to be
not as amenable to that pressure, and so that
doesn't mean that we should give up. That means
that there are still things that we can do,
and that's where My anarchist friends and colleagues are
really helpful because they are about reimagining our communities,
our immediate communities, and how we can do things
in our daily lives right now to bring the
world that we want to live in a little
bit closer to us. And I think that that's
an insight that sometimes We forget that we have
the power to make the world the way we
want it to be, and that we, yes, the
political system is intractable sometimes, but if enough people
decide to do things a particular way, we have
power collectively that even the state can't prevent us
from doing the things that we want to do
in our lives.
How about the Israeli kibbutzim? Are they also a
sort of uh a form of utopian society?
That's a tricky question, right? So I think that
the, the original. Kibbutzim, uh, the kibbutzniks that came
from Europe. I mean, the early, uh, the first
kibbutz was Dagana like founded in 1909, well before
the, the founding of the state of Israel. I
think when we talk about the kibbutz, we have
to be very careful because of what's happening in
the political world today and the role that the
kibbutzniks played, you know, in the, in the in
the in in settling. Um, BUT the impulse, right,
the impulse behind these, um, keyboard scene, particularly the
ones that were 100% socialized, right? It definitely comes,
it's a direct descendant of some of these utopian
19th, 18th and 19th century utopias in Europe. They
were thinking a lot. About how to create self-sustaining
societies where they could collectively share their property, feed
themselves, raise their children collectively, and thrive in a
way that was in keeping with their sort of
uh moral and theological principles. And so, From that
perspective, uh, I, yes, I would say the keyboard
team are a descendant of these utopian ideas. The
way that they, you know, have played a role
in particular kind of settler politics, some people today
would definitely say is very dystopian, but I don't
think that that was their, um, that was their
intent to begin with.
Uh, A very interesting thing is also that we
tend to live in patriarchal societies, but in the
book, you also explore Colombian eco villages that are
matriarchal, right, where residents grow their own food. So
tell us a little bit about them.
Yeah, so I mean, so I think whenever we
whenever we talk about Dismantling patriarchy. We have to
understand that matriarchy or the word matriarchal, right, does
not mean That that that you just have a
society that looks like a patriarchal society, but that's
run by women. A lot of people make this
mistake, right? Um, A, a matriarchal society tends to
be much more egalitarian and non-hierarchical, right? Power is
distributed much more laterally. Patriarchal societies tend to be
very vertical. Matriarchal societies historically have been much more
horizontal. And so, um, and, and, and that's a
really important point because when we're talking about dismantling
patriarchy, it's not like we're just throwing women in
power. You know, we don't need any more Margaret
Thatcher in the world, right? We're actually talking about
devolving power and and living in a more egalitarian
society. And so this matriarchal, um, Nashira, it's called
in Colombia is a is an example of a,
a, um, sort of a hybrid society in some
ways where There are basically uh only women in
charge. There are some men who live in the
village, but for the most part, it's the women
who collectively make decisions, and they are completely self-sustainable,
they grow their own food, they have their own
sort of uh social organization. And it was really
created in a way as a response to, you
know, not only long history of of violence in
Colombia, but also, um, you know, problems of domestic
violence in what is a very sort of machismo
based society. And so, It's an attempt to organize
a community based on far more peaceful and egalitarian
and non-patriarchal principles and You know, it has, it
has been an inspiration. There, there are a lot
of communities that look to Nashira and other forms
of organizing to to think about how we might
also organize our lives differently. I think Nashira is
interesting in that it is explicitly matriarchal in the
sense that in that case, women are the ones
who have the political power within the community. Yeah.
So tell us also about uh planned microdistricts in
China where households can have easy access to everything
they need.
Yeah, so this idea, this, this is an idea
that actually starts really in the Soviet Union and
it spreads all over the world, uh, in, in
any place where basically sort of Soviet or Eastern
bloc architects went. And they were called micro Raoni
in the, um, in the Soviet context. And, um,
basically, these days, if you've ever heard of something
called the 15 Minute City. This is a kind
of reinterpretation of this idea, but like trying to
get rid of the Soviet baggage, like people don't
want to hear that this was a Soviet idea.
But the idea was that you would build communities.
That were walking, that were um pedestrian communities, so
all of the roads would be on the outside.
By the way, this is true of cohousing too.
There are no cars in the community. All of
the cars are parked on the outside. The same
was true of these microdistricts, and the idea was
that you would have microdistricts, you would have people
living in these sort of um Tall tower blocks
and then there would be parks and public amenities
on the ground floor of these blocks. So butchers
and uh dairies and kindergartens and polyclinics and parks
and everything that you needed. WOULD be within a
15 minute walk from your house. And that was
a very, very popular model and it worked very
well and and I mean actually anywhere you travel
around the world, uh, that was a former socialist
city, uh, you know, former socialist country where a
lot of their urban planning was done in cooperation
with Polish or Bulgarian or Soviet or Chinese architects,
you will find these microdistricts. And they, they are
extremely, I mean, ironically, they were not built for
environmental reasons. They were built to create more collective
communities and to reduce the burdens on individual women
in the households, um, but it turns out. That
now in 2025 as we face the reality of
the climate crisis, that microdistricts, these micro Raoni are
extremely environmentally friendly because you have shared resources and
amenities in a way that single family homes do
not. Single family homes are incredibly inefficient, uh, when
you think it's just, if you think about heating
and cooling alone. In a in a in a
in a world that is facing a climate crisis
where we're going to have extremes of heat and
extremes of cold. Just the energy resources necessary to
heat or cool our individual boxes are much less
efficient than if we lived more collectively with people
in in buildings where heat and cooling could be
shared. And so just on that alone, these communities
are far more environmentally efficient than single family homes,
but because they have this sort of socialist baggage,
I mean, they're all over the place in China.
Um, PEOPLE, people reject them.
I mean, I guess that when people hear the
word bleed, they immediately think of gulags and
exactly, exactly. I mean, that's why I mean I'm.
I'm impressed in some ways that these younger architects
who are talking now about the 15 minute city,
they're like trying to relaunch the idea from an
environmental perspective without any of the planned baggage, but
it's essentially the same idea. They're just rebranding it
to make it sound more modern and, and, um,
you know, less associated with the sort of problematic
socialist past.
OK, so, I mean, I'm not sure if you're
religious or not. I would imagine you're not because
of your liking of socialism and things like that,
but do you think that monastic life can also
constitute a form of utopia?
Absolutely. In fact, I think that monastic life is
probably the original utopia. So if we think of
like uh Saint Benedict of Nursia, um, I was
raised Catholic and so I um I think that
when we think of early monastic communities, so the,
the earliest monastic communities were Buddhists. Uh, THEY decided
to live collectively at first during the rainy season,
uh, and then eventually they decided to settle collectively,
and we know that there in, in the Christian
tradition there were Aramitic, um, monasteries of people who
live by like live by themselves, hermits, but that
eventually there was the formation of enobidic communities which
are settled communities of religious people living together. To
share their property in common. And uh and that
tradition starts in Egypt, and then it moves to
Italy, and Saint Benedict of Nursia creates this thing
called the rule of Saint Benedict, which is essentially
a text about how a bunch of non-related people
could live together in harmony with each other and
with nature. It is in, in so many ways
fundamentally a utopian community document. And, and that is
if, if, if we think about um Monasteries. In
all traditions, right, where you're living outside of the
world, the one thing that I think is really
fascinating is that most monasteries, not all, but most
monasteries take in children. Right? And they, and they
raise those children collectively outside of the, the strictures
of the the patriarchal nuclear family. And so, yes,
absolutely. And, and when we think about certain kinds
of structures where we still live communally today like
university dormitories, if you've ever spent time on a
residential university campus, universities are modeled on monasteries. And
even um Charles Fourier, who talks about the philancery,
right, the philanceri is an interesting portmanteau of the
word phalanx and monastery. So monasteries and monastic forms
of living are really fundamental, I think, to utopian
visions of community.
OK, so in terms of these societies, we talked
about several of their aspects like for example, family,
uh eco the economy, gender roles and stuff like
that. One thing I haven't asked you about yet
is education. So do you think that in these
societies there are alternative forms of education and that
we also need that or not?
Yeah, I, I spent a whole chapter in the
book talking about education. I think education is probably
one of the, the key linchpins of, of building
an alternative society because public education in particular, which
was itself a utopian demand, you got to remember
the 10th point of the communist manifesto was public
education at public expense for all children in public
schools, right? Somehow that vision of education got co-opted
and public education has largely become a tool of
social control. Uh, AND that's why, I mean, if
you look at the situation in my country, like
Republicans are constantly trying to get into the schools
and control what students are taught and what books
they read, there's a real desire to control education
and so. Yes, if we're going to live in
a different world, we have to have a different
view of education. And uh I spent a lot
of time in the book talking about alternate visions
of of education and the ways in which young
people learn about the world. And I think that,
you know, they're they're sort of two. I mean,
I, I could say a lot, but so I
won't because there's, there's just a lot of information
in that chapter because that was sort of a
chapter that was really important to me because I
am myself a professor. I am an educator. And
I think that there's, there's sort of three parts
of education. And one part of education is to
basically equip us with the tools that we need
to function in the world, right? We need to
be able to be on time and we need
to be able to play well with others, and
we need to be able to like Do math
and and and read and have, you know, essential
literacy and and sort of understand when we're being
lied to and when we're not being lied to
and, you know, just sort of be able to
function. And then there's a sort of kind of
education which I think of as sort of more
of a pedantic form of education, which is information,
right? And this is the kind of thing that
is, is, is dying right now because we can
get all the information we need on Wikipedia and
so there's no need to go and read a
really long book when you could just like read
the 15 minute summary or whatever AI can give
you a Uh, you know, a small little summary
that you You, uh, You just, uh, you just
absorb and you forget. It it's like it's, it's
it's it it's a sort of informational aspect of
education is, is, is, is in flux right now,
I think. But then there's this third aspect of
education, which is the, the education of the mind
and and and what we call critical thinking skills,
and this idea. That all human beings, we have
this thing called the prefrontal cortex. It's the it's
the rational part of our brain and it's a
very calorically, energetically hungry part of the brain. And
so we don't need to use it and we
don't need to grow it. And so it, if,
if we don't use it, and if we don't
grow it, it just doesn't develop. And so One
of the things that I think education has done
in the last 150, 200 years is to democratize.
The growth of our prefrontal cortices, so that even
the children of poor people can develop rational thinking
skills. I mean, I'm talking physically about developing a
part of the brain that would not develop if
you start working as a child at 13 or
14 or 15. Like, if you're, if you don't
need or. If you're on your phone, right, constantly,
and you're just like being fed a steady stream
of reels or TikToks or whatever, and you don't
ever actually have to think. Your prefrontal cortex will
just stop growing, and once it stops growing, It's
done. You can't like, you can't get it back.
And so I think that the, the value of
education and the importance of education is to continue
to, to support a more egalitarian growth of the
prefrontal cortex, because what's happening in 2025. If you
ask me, and this may be a little bit
of a controversial point of view, but what's happening
is that we're seeing a, a in egalitarian distribution
of cognitive ability, so that people like, you know,
like Mark Zuckerberg or whatever, doesn't let his children
play on the phone. That should tell you something,
right? Um, THESE, these tech titans are creating these
very addictive social media platforms don't want their own
children to be on them. And so elite people.
Economic and political and cultural elites will raise their
children to have these cognitive capacities, and the rest
of society is literally going to be cognitively unequal.
This is not just about economically unequal. I'm actually
saying that they will have ultimately less cognitive capacity
because they haven't had the opportunities to develop. Certain
parts of their brain which require certain kinds of
stimulation at a particular age in order for those
parts of the brain to develop. And so, the
role of education. In a utopian society, and especially
now that we're living in a world of AI,
right? Where we have computers that are gonna be
thinking for us, that are going to prevent us
from thinking for ourselves, is to develop, to make
sure absolutely sure that every child has the opportunity
to develop those cognitive capacities if they want to.
And I just think that it's. It's an absolute
crime right now of what's happening around the world
where people are basically being prevented. I mean, we're
basically going back to the 17th, 16th, 15th century.
We're going back to the Middle Ages, where most
people don't learn to read, where most people weren't
weren't uh numerate, where people didn't have to think
because they basically worked in agriculture and they just
had to follow orders and do what they were
told, and they didn't need a brain or the
history of women, right? Um, NOT being educated because
they all they had to do was make babies
and they didn't need a brain for that. And
I think that this is a, this is a,
this is the worst form of inequality, this cognitive
inequality. It is, it is, it is, it is
creating a class of people that do not have
the cognitive tools to liberate themselves from oppression, and
I just think this is the worst form of
inequality we face right now in the world today.
So these different forms of social organization we talked
about like the ones in Denmark and China. Do
you think that it would be possible for them
to operate at the state level? I mean, instead
of the level of just small communities, uh, at
the level of an entire country, for example.
Yeah, I mean, absolutely. I, I do think that
it's possible. Again, it depends on how big the
country is. Um, I think geographic proximity is probably
somewhat important. Uh, I, you know, there's a big
debate about ethnic homogeneity, like some people say, well,
the Scandinavian countries work so well because they're more
ethnically homogenous, like they will never happen in the
United States because we're too diverse. I'm not very,
I'm not very convinced by those arguments because I
think that basically what people are saying is that
we're just all racists, and so we can't overcome
our racism, and that just does, that's just stupid.
Obviously, we can overcome our racism. We have in
the past, and so that's just a, that's just
a, you know, a question of will and development
and education. But I do think that any And
this is, this is so, so your question is
a complicated one because You're what you're saying is
Can we do A sort of extreme form of
redistributive politics within the container of the nation state.
And, and some people will say that the nation
state is the problem, right? That the nation states
exists in order to prevent the redistribution of resources.
I happen to be the kind of person who
thinks no, the that the nation state can be
a tool for redistribution. It can actually represent the
will of the people. I, I, I maybe, maybe
I'm naive, but I actually think that the state
can be. A valuable. Thing, right? Um, THE problem
is how do you maintain democratic participation in that
state so that it does not become some kind
of totalitarian regime, so it does not become some
kind of patriarchal nightmare, you know, um, and that's
trickier, right? There, there is, there is a tendency
to When the state becomes the paternalistic sort of
provider, that there there there are inherently problems that
then arise with the stickiness of state power, that
it's not as flexible and dynamic as we might
want that state to be as society changes. And
so, in theory, absolutely, I'm a profound believer in
the possibility of people. Using the state for their
own collective well-being. Um, BUT I also recognize that
there are problems with the model, and so we
need to keep working on it. That's, that's my
feeling is that we haven't found the right model
yet, but that doesn't mean that that model doesn't
exist. We just have to keep pursuing this utopian
goal of refining the model.
Since we're talking about utopias, do you think that
communism itself also counts as a form of utopia?
I mean, certainly in Marxist theory, when we think
about sort of the teleological. I mean, Marxism is
a sort of Hegelian teleological dialectic, right? So so
one stage follows the next. You have like um
slavery and then feudalism and then capitalism, and then
socialism, and then ultimately communism, right? So if we're
talking about traditional Marxist theory where communism is the
moment when the state withers away and people live
collectively and there's no law, of course that's utopian.
Right, that's, that's probably one of the most extreme
utopian visions that we have still active in our
societies today. I don't think when people use the
word communism to refer to 20th century state socialism
in Eastern Europe, which themselves, they did not call
themselves communist societies, they called themselves socialist societies because
they recognized that they were at a. Stage that
was still socialism, right? They, they, they, they often
called themselves communists. They were part they were members
of communist parties because the goal was communism. But
the stage that they were at, they called really
existing socialism. And that, of course, was not a
utopian society. It was an attempt to build the
conditions under which utopia would be realized eventually, but
the societies as they existed, were still very much
in the stage of basically trying to figure out
how to make states work to redistribute wealth in
a more equitable way. Um, AND so it's again,
it, it depends on what you, what you mean
by the word communism because in my country when
we say communist we're almost always talking about the
Soviet Union and we're not talking about the ideal
Marxist form of communism which is this moment where
there is no state and there is no law.
And, yeah, yeah,
I was talking about the ideal vision because I
mean, actually, if we at least follow the Marxist
vision of communism, we've never had a communist society.
Right. Exactly. And that's what I'm trying to say,
yeah, and I think that, you know, that's why.
I think it's very important to remember that Marx
and Engels were in dialogue with the utopian socialists
in many ways, like a lot of their basic
ideas come from people like Flora Tristan, especially around
the issue of the family. And so they were
very aware of like the technologies of how we
would eventually get to communism, but what they disagreed
with fundamentally was that you could build kind of
a little utopia within a capitalist society and that
that would make any difference. They really felt like
you had to seize the state. You actually had
to overthrow everything in order to to get to
that end state of communism, you know, and then
today. I think it's worth again also, you know,
recognizing like the anarcho-communists, and there are many people.
Who believe that climate change uh is going to,
you know, do so much damage to the planet
that we, we will eventually have what's called civilizational
collapse. So there are these people called post-civilizationalists, right?
They, they think that like we don't have to
do anything, like everything is just gonna go to
hell. And then from the ashes of that, we
can build the society that we want. And so
we have to be prepared for that. So they're
not even saying that, you know, we should, um,
you know, build little communities that will then spread
in a kind of federated, you know, way, and
they're not saying we should overthrow the state. They're
just basically saying, you know what, Civilization is doomed,
like we've screwed the planet. Capitalism is using too
many resources. Whatever, you know, is gonna happen in
the next 20 years or 30 years. I don't
know, sometimes they have a very short horizon, sometimes
they have a long horizon, but we need to
be ready to build. Our utopia when the time
comes. And so you have some of these communities
where I call them sort of extreme green preppers.
I think in in um Portugal there's Tamara, right?
There are some of these other eco villages where
they're really trying to imagine what society is going
to be like post civilization. And uh and they
think of that as a good thing, right? They,
they're very convinced that this will be a moment
for the human race to hit reset and we'll
have and we will actually achieve some form of
communism in the aftermath of civilizational collapse. You know,
it's a pretty extreme view, but it's out there
and people are talking about it, and I think
it's worth talking about because it is an interesting,
it is an interesting thought experiment, like, were the
world to like suddenly change tomorrow, um, how would
we rebuild our societies? Would we, would we actually
reproduce capitalism in the way that we have it
today, or would we actually improve on the model
and do something or do something completely different?
What do you think that we can gain by
studying the history of this sort of social dreams
and utopian visions of society that people have and
sometime, sometimes try to implement to varying degrees of
success?
Imagination and hope. We need both of those. If
we're going to survive the next decades with all
of the variety of problems that we are facing
in the world today, probably foremost, the climate crisis,
but also just in general, there's so much. Negative,
um. I mean, war and famine. I mean, I,
I could, I could, the list could go on
for quite a long time. The, the, the, the
incredible uh and fast development of artificial intelligence. Who
knows when general artificial intelligence will be around. There's
a we're going through an accelerated period of change.
And for some people, it shuts them down. Like
they, I feel like a lot of people have
become politically and socially ideologically catatonic. They can't, they
can't face or cope with the amount of negative
news and the amount of change that is happening
in the world today. And so studying the past
history of utopia. Gives us imagination, gives us possibility
that things could be different, that they things have
always been bad in the world. There's always been
bad stuff happening and um and and and people
have always been resisting. I think that's the most
important lesson that we get is that people have
in every single cultural context, in every single historical
epoch where there has been injustice or where there
has been tyranny or where there has been uncontrolled.
Social change, there have always been people who resisted.
There have always been people who use our creativity,
our flexibility, and our adaptivity to challenge the status
quo and create new ways of living. And by
learning about these people, that's what I hope this
book brings to people, is this possibility of hope,
and this possibility of optimism that the future can
be different because we have the capacity to make
it different if we want to.
OK, but on the other hand, and this will
be my last question, I guess we, I also
need to ask you about what you think might
be some of the, if you think there's any,
of course, some of the drawbacks and limitations of
this. Utopian visions because we know actually that, for
example, in the 19th century, some of the societies,
alternative societies, people tried actually failed. So, what, what
do you think are perhaps some of the pre
if not drawbacks and limitations, maybe difficulties in trying
to implement these kinds of society?
Yeah, so I say in the book, and, and
I think this is really important to go back
to this discussion that we had earlier about the
no place and the good place, the word utopia
itself. So, utopia has to remain on the horizon.
I think if anybody tells you, hey, by the
way, we're living in utopia, here are the rules
and you have to follow them, run away as
fast as you can, right? Utopia, the minute it
gets to be fixed. The minute it has a
a a clear delineated set of rules and rulers,
you're no longer in a utopia. You're actually in
the beginnings of a dystopia, and that's why it's
so valuable to study these communities that failed, as
well as the ones that succeeded for as long
as they did, and then eventually cease to exist
for a variety of reasons. So, in my view,
Utopia is always about challenging the hegemony of the
status quo, right? So people like um Ernst Bloch,
right, that these German uh philosophers or Karl Mannheim,
they talk a lot about the role of ideology.
We all live in an ideological system that that
shapes our way of thinking about the world, what
we imagine the world to be and how we
imagine the world to function. Again, what you said,
uh, we talked about earlier that in times of
great upheaval, people start to generate social ideas, social
dreams, because the status quo has been upset. But
what Mannheim and Bloch argue is that utopia, utopian
visions as a concept, they exist to challenge hegemonic
thinking in society. And again, I think this is
a sort of dialectical way of imagining the progress
of human history. We are always a thesis in
search of an antithesis which will create a conflict,
which will create a new synthesis in a very
kind of Hegelian dialectical way of of of thinking
about history. And so, For me, that's why utopia
can't be a thesis. It can never be a
fixed thing. It always has to play the role
of antithesis. The minute you create a society within
that society, there has to be people criticizing that
society. And so utopian thinking plays the role of
like the devil's advocate in many ways. It says,
hey, the way you're living your life or the
way we're doing things right now is not ideal.
And And this reflects a reality about human history,
which is that human history and human evolution, the
the circumstances under which we live are always changing.
And so we can never have a set of
rules that work for everybody at the same time
in all places, right? It just, it, it like
society doesn't work that way. We're always going to
be developing because things are changing all around us.
And so people will try to create new realities.
People will try to keep new rules, new ideologies
to keep people in place. Ideological systems are about
maintaining social order. And then when those ideological systems
break down, it's not surprising that we see a
breakdown in social order. And so what utopians are
always trying to do is say, hey, this social
order that you've created benefits a very small number
of people. And that's, that's been generally true in
history, and one of the things that we've seen,
again, if you think about the teleology of history
is that Maybe with the exception of the last
decade, is that we've built societies where greater number
of people benefit from the system. It's not perfect,
right? But we don't, for most of us are
not living in like, you know, totalitarian monarchies or
something like that where there's like one person with
all the power and everybody else has none. We're
actually getting, we're getting better. Progress is slow, and
we sometimes we revert to the past. There's regression.
But there is this forward momentum, and I argue
in the book. That utopians are the key, right?
These social dreamers, these radical thinkers, square pegs in
the round hole, right? Like there's all different ways
people have sometimes they've been considered fools or they've
been naive or whatever crazy they, the word utopian
means unrealistic, right? That the whole way in which
we talk about people who are utopian or have
utopian thoughts. Is that they're, they're crazy. They, they
don't make any sense. But those are the people
that actually push us forward. We follow those people
into the future. We, they forge the path forward
to us. I mean, As I talk about in
the book, like the idea of kindergartens and childcare,
utopian, the idea of public education in public schools,
utopian, the idea of divorce, utopian, women keeping their
own names, utopian. All of these were ideas that
started out as totally utopian pie in the sky.
And then slowly, they became mainstream, and now we
think of dropping our kids off at a kindergarten
is the most natural thing in the world, or
getting a divorce, or sending your kids to a
public school. That's not utopian. You're not participating in
a utopia. You're just doing what everybody else does.
And so, in some ways, the success of utopian
ideas is that you don't even think of them
as utopian anymore. You forget that they were ever
utopian to begin with. The downside of this, I
think, is that some utopian ideas can justify incredible
evils in the world if they are implemented by
the wrong people, because in times of great social
upheaval, people are also really looking for answers. And,
you know, not all utopias are progressive. Some utopias
can be extremely regressive and can be extremely um
Counterproductive to the progress of human history. I mean,
many people would say that capitalism in its purest
form is a utopian vision of the way you
organize the economy. And so, yeah, I, I think
we have to be careful when we talk about
utopia, but in my vision, and I think in
the vision of, of, as I said, philosophers and
sociologists like Ernst Bloch and Karl Mannheim and and
many of the other scholars who I talk about
in the book, who talk about the value of
utopian thinking. What we're saying is that utopianism is
always a critique. It's kind of a counter hegemonic
ideology to the reigning ideology that that maintains a
certain social order that benefits a small group in
society. And if we want to try to redistribute
resources and redistribute privilege more equitably among more members
of society, then we always need to have utopians
and utopian thinking in our lives.
Great. So the book is again everyday Utopia, What
2 1000 Years of Wild Experiments Can Teach Us
about the Good Life. And of course, I'm leaving
a link within the description of the interview. And
Dr. Gody, where can people find your work on
the internet if they're interested?
Yeah, so I have a website, you know, very
easy to find kristin Gotze.com. Um, YOU know, I
write, uh, popularly, uh, for a variety of different
outlets, The New York Times, The Washington Post, the
Jacobin Magazine, so different places, but all the bylines
are, are on linked from my website, and you
know, I'm, I'm pretty easy to find. Um, YEAH,
so.
Yeah, great. I will be leaving also links to
some of that in the description and thank you
so much for taking the time to come on
the show again. As I said at the beginning,
it's always a great pleasure to talk with you.
Thank you so much for having me again. It's
been fun.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes called Holbrookfield governor
Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnseroro and Hal
Herzognun Macha Joan La Jasent and the Samuel Corriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran David
Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujorumen Roach Diego Londonorea. Yannick Punteran
Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynaleb medicine, Gary Galman
Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon Scorteus Slelisky,
Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman. Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous,
Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the Augusta, Anton
Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier,
bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old Heringbo. Sterry
Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy Zigoren, Jeff McMahon,
Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke
Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki,
Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin
Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway,
BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursulauddinov, Gregory
Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos
Net. A special thanks to my producers. These are
Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis
Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and
to my executive producers Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan
Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.